Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always Ricardo Lops. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Paul Halpern. He is
Professor of Physics at Saint Joseph's University in Philadelphia.
He is the author of several books. And today
we're focusing on his latest one, the Allure of
the Multiverse, extra dimensions, other worlds and parallel universes.
So Paul, welcome to the show. It's a big
pleasure to everyone.
My pleasure to thank you for having me on
your show, Ricardo.
So let's start with this then. Uh I know
that in the book, you go through a little
bit actually of the history behind the idea of
the multiverse and the UX you of of course,
focus mostly on physics, but you also talk about
the ideas of some philosophers, for example. So do
you know how old is the idea of the
multiverse actually?
Well, it's interesting because the term multiverse goes back
to William James who was a, a writer and
uh and also kind of an early psychologist. And
uh he talked about the psychological idea of a
multiverse back in the 19th century uh as kind
of a morally ambiguous universe, that a universe that
was neither good nor evil and was pretty much
ambivalent to whether someone is good, someone is evil.
So he called it kind of a moral multiverse.
But that's just a term. I don't think he
meant that in the sense of parallel universes and
the idea of parallel universes and science really took
off in the 19 seventies and 19 eighties and
especially in this century, in the 21st century, the
idea really became popular but going all the way
back to the people like Giordano, Bruno, uh you
know, the Italian uh philosopher, that's when people start
talking about many worlds out there, worlds that might
be similar to earth. And Bruno, of course, famously
was burned at the stake for writing that there
are an infinite number of worlds out there. And
some of those could be, you know, inhabited and
like earth. And he speculated about this and that
was considered uh heresy blasphemy by the Roman inquisition.
And, you know, sadly, he was killed by the
Roman inquisition for, for that heresy and other heresies.
And then around the same time, Galileo, who was
a little bit higher placed, he had more connections.
So he wasn't uh luckily he wasn't executed, but
he also speculated about, you know, many worlds out
there. And then in the 19th century, based upon
Newtonian physics, Newtonian determinism, uh people start figuring out
that if you have a finite number of elements
a finite number of possibilities. But an infinite universe
eventually all the combinations would start to repeat themselves.
So just like if you're playing uh the game
of chess, eventually you run out of moves and
would repeat the same moves. They're not an infinite
number of moves in chess. Similarly, uh if you
had an infinite universe, but a finite number of
elements and a finite number of possibilities, eventually, you
would have something like Earth recreated and the philosopher,
while the the revolutionary uh Luis Blanc Blanche in
France, while he was imprisoned in a fortress for
revolutionary activity, speculated that there might be um many,
many copies of Earth out there that some of
them might be exact, some of them might be
inexact. And maybe some of the things that play
out on Earth would happen in some of the
other universes such as, you know, French revolution and
so forth. So it's kind of interesting to think
about this. But now we know that the universe
is expanding and accelerating its expansion. So and it
might be that there is a duplicate Earth out
there, but it would be so far away from
us will be well beyond the possibility of observation,
well beyond the observable universe, because the sheer probability
of creating uh something that's exactly like the Earth
would be so minimal that it would take far
longer than the than the time length of the
Big Bang and far greater than the size of
the observable universe to recreate something like that. So
it's, it's pretty much impossible.
So one idea that you mentioned there, the fact
that people at a certain point notice that if
there are a limited number of possible arrangements of
matter, then if time is infinite, then eventually the
same configurations would repeat themselves over time. That's actually
something that comes around also in Nietzsche, right? And
the idea of the eternal return because I, I
guess that in that aspect, he was influenced by
some uh physicists back in the 19th century, right?
Yeah.
So Friedrich Nietzsche, the German philosopher um came up
with the idea of eternal return. And uh he
unlike uh Eastern philosophers, he talked about an exact
repetition of history. Um So he imagined that his
life and all of its pain and suffering and
some joy, mostly a little bit of joy would
um repeat itself sometime in the future just based
upon the idea of chance reoccurrence. So, you know,
for any kind of game with finite elements, I
mentioned chess, but also the game of tiktok Toe
with Xs and Os. Eventually you just run out
of moves. And Tik Tok Toe, if you're familiar
with it has a square, has nine uh elements
in a square with Xs and Os is the
only possibilities. And it's, it could be a boring
game if you play it long enough because you
repeat the same moves again and again. And similarly,
Nietzsche thought that his life will repeat itself. But
if we estimate how long it would take for
earth to repeat itself, uh It was, you know,
far, far, far, you know, almost unimaginably far longer
than the history of the universe. So it's, it's
incredibly unlikely as people like uh Nietzsche's contemporary Ludwig
Boltzmann pointed out Boltzmann talked about the idea of
the arrow of time and increasing entropy. People said,
hey, wait a minute, things could randomly come together
again. But the estimate of that happening, it's just
incredibly improbable. So uh normally we don't have to
worry about it.
Mhm But uh let me just ask you one
question since you mentioned Giordano Bruno there earlier and
also Galileo and I, we're talking about Nietzsche because
if I understand it correctly, uh For example, Giordano
Bruno was uh talking back then in the 16
century or so about there being other worlds. But
by worlds, I guess he was referring mostly to
planets, other planets like earth out there, I mean,
but so uh and if those people are mostly
talking about uh other worlds in our universe or
in the case of Nietzsche inside of our universe,
things repeating themselves over time. Uh That isn't exactly
the same thing as a multiverse. Yeah,
that is an excellent point. And that's why I
say the modern idea of a multiverse, actual multiverse
started in really in the 19 seventies when you
had Bryce de Witt popularizing the idea of Hugh
Everett of um what's called the many worlds interpretation
of quantum mechanics. And that's a name that Dewitt
uh almost coined. He said many universes, but it
became many worlds. And then Brandon Carter took that
idea and turned it into the, you know, variation
of it into the anthropic principle. And then later,
other scientists took that idea to try to explain
fine tuning and I'm sure we'll talk about that
later. But that was an actual idea of something
beyond the physical universe. But, you know, our scope
has expanded over the centuries. So of course, um
in a time of Pythagoras, the time of the
ancient Greeks, no one imagined that there was really
anything beyond earth. And maybe the, you know, the
Pythagorean talked about a central fire, but they talked
about 10 objects including the celestial sphere, which was,
you know, this the dome of stars and that
was kind of considered something fixed out there, not
something with, you know, unlimited objects, but something that
was just kind of this fixed dome, fixed uh
element. And um you know, these planets, but we
had no idea what the scope of the the
galaxy was, let alone the universe. And then of
course, in the time of Galileo and Bruno, we
started to think about um other stars, other planets
uh but they weren't known yet and it was
only in the 19 nineties, believe it or not
that um astronomers detected the first exoplanets beyond the
solar system. And that was, you know, when we
got to confirm that hypothesis, finally, Bruno hypothesis that
there are actually other planets around other stars. And
now most astronomers think that there are trillions of
planets out there. You know, just based upon the
ones we've found so far, the thousands of ones
we've found so far, if you extrapolate, there are
likely planets around most stars. So we can talk
about trillions of planets out there. But then within,
you know, within the last 100 years, believe it
or not. Um That's when we discovered other Galaxies.
It was only really in 1926 with the observations
of Edwin Hubble that we showed that the Andromeda
nebula as it was called, it was thought to
be a gas cloud was really an object outside
of, of our own own galaxy. And that resolved
what was called the great debate over whether or
not the milky way was the only object give
or take a few things in the periphery or
if there are numerous Galaxies out there.
And how do physicists themselves uh think about the
multiverse? And are there different conceptualizations of what the
multiverse might be among
physicists? Yeah. So there are many different multiverses which
can be a little bit confusing and none of
them are really like the cultural idea of the
multiverse, which you can also talk about, which is
the multiverse in movies. So everyone imagines in movies,
you know, you wake up and you, you go
through a portal and you see a near identical
version of yourself or you see, you know, a,
a superhero that has a different origin story, like
a different Spiderman or different, you know, different version
of ultra or whatever, like different superheroes. But uh
you know, in, in physics, the multiverse ideas are
confined to either something having to do with the
very small or something having to do with the
very large. So either quantum multiverse or a cosmological
multiverse. And the quantum multiverse is usually called the
many worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics. And that was
developed by Hugh Everett the third who was a
student of the great American physicist John Wheeler, who
I who I had the pleasure of meeting before
he passed away, very interesting fellow. And whoever it
proposed the idea that when you take a quantum
measurement, you the observer do not affect the measurement,
uh you do not influence the measurement. So then
the question arises, how come you get an exact
result? Whereas we know in quantum physics, you have
a blending of possibilities before the measurement is taken.
How do you get an exact result when the
measurement was taken? And the old idea, the orthodox
idea is that the measurer collapses the wave function
down to one possibility like knocking over a a
stack of of cards and collapsing it down to
a single pile. Well Everett's idea is that the
measurer does not affect anything. Rather the measurer sees
all the possibilities, all the the different outcomes at
once. Well, how can that happen? Because the measurers
conscious uh conscious record says, I see one observation.
So that must mean that the measures consciousness branches
out into multiple possibilities. And each version of the
conscious observer sees a different value or a different
outcome of the measurement. So there's a branching of
human beings that matches the branching of quantum outcomes
and that all matches up with a universal wave
function that never collapses. But there's all these possibilities
out there in different enclaves of the universe. So
that gives you parallel universes. So that's a quantum
idea and cosmology. It's the possibility of other bubble
universes out there aside from the Big Bang. So
aside from uh our own Big Bang, that there
are other universes expanding out there just beyond the
range of observation. And that for some people is
more palatable because that's not something that's happening all
the time. This is something that um happens, you
know, with a cosmogenesis event, a uni universe creation
event. And it almost seems in a way logical
if our universe is created in a in a
relatively easy way through um you know, the observable
universe created in a process called inflation that maybe
inflation happens, you know, elsewhere in in reality.
And so those are the main reasons uh why
the theoretical physicists have theorized about the possible multiverse
is I, is it for with, with the idea
of explaining those aspects of our reality?
Yes. Well, we want to explain the observable universe
and we want to explain the observable results from
quantum measurements. So we know that when we take
a quantum measurement, we get um if we repeat
the measurement, we, we might get different outcomes. But
we can, if we repeat the measurement enough times,
we can map out the probabilities of those various
outcomes. So we know that there's a certain amount
of chance, we know that there's a certain range
of possibilities. We know that we don't always get
the same possibility. And we know that um that
the uh results uh can only be precise for
certain parameters that we, because of Eise Heisenberg's uncertainty
principle that we can't measure position pre precisely and
the momentum precisely at the same time. So these
are things we know the question is how to
explain it. And there are many different ways to
explain quantum measurement. Uh Similarly, we know that the
universe on the largest scale is very even very
regular. If we look in one direction, we see
pretty much the same number of Galaxies as in
the complete opposite direction. If we look and measure
the cosmic radiation background, the temperature of it is
very, very close to the same in all directions,
there's slight variations. So the question is how do
we get such uniformity. Is it just a coincidence
or is there some reason that the universe smoothed
out in the beginning that led to the idea
of inflation? And then it turns out that inflation
is pretty easy to produce in Einstein's general theory
of relativity by just having the right energy configuration,
the right energy set up. So um so Andre
Linday, the Russian born um cosmologist who's now at
Stanford University, came up with the idea of an
eternal inflation, which is that this happens repeatedly. But
I should say that the idea of the multiverse
really became popular when people started grappling with the
idea that the cosmological constant of the universe, which
is a anti kind of anti gravity parameter that's
causing the universe to slightly accelerate um over time
um seems very large by one calculation, calculating the
quantum energy background. So if you look at empty
space, it's not really empty, it has particles that
are popping in and out of emptiness. And if
you add up the energy of all those particles,
you get something that could be called the cosmological
constant. And let me explain what the cosmological constant
is. When Einstein developed his general theory of relativity,
which is how space and time uh create gravity
through their curvature. He realized that he wasn't getting
stable results, he was getting results that would either
contract or expand. And it was when he developed
that was, that was before hubble's um proof as
it turns out that the universe is expanding and
he thought he made a mistake. So he added
the cosmological constant as a stabilizing term, which kind
of pushes the universe outward to stabilize it against
gravity to make it a steady universe, a static
universe. But then uh he dropped that idea. He
said it was a big mistake that he shouldn't
have even introduced it. But ideas tend to persist.
And in 1998 2 teams of cosmologists used um
uh observations of the universe to show that not
only is the universe expanding, it's accelerating in its
expansion. So something is pushing it out faster and
faster over time. And that must be something which
sometimes is called dark energy. But you could also
use a cosmological constant as a way of modeling
that dark dark energy that cosmological constant turns out
to be very, very small because if it were
big, it would have affected uh the development of
stars Galaxies and so forth. It would have made
it impossible for structure to form. So it's this
really, really minute cosmological constant. So you don't feel
it until billions of years into the history of
the universe. So the 1st 5 billion years of
so the history of the universe, you don't feel
this anti gravity push and stars can form Galaxies
form earth forms, everything forms just nice. But then
later in the history of the universe, suddenly you
start feeling this outward push and the universe starts
to speed up in its expansion because this cosmological
constant term is small. But people in quantum field
theory calculate the cosmological constant based on the energy
of empty space. And they say it must be
huge. So the question is why in reality, you
have a small cosmological constant. But really based on
quantum field theory, you should have a large one.
And the answer that some people have is that
maybe the universe is really a multiverse and that
you have all these expanding universes out there. And
each of them has its own cosmological constant and
that some of them are enormous and some of
them are moderate. And we happen to be in
an outlier, we happen to be in the very,
very odd strange universe that has a tiny cosmological
constant. So, um you know, so we are just
in this really bizarre universe that has a small
cosmo cosmological constant. But it's lucky that we are
because that's the only way stars can form and
Galaxies can form and life can form. And that's
why we're here because we happen to be in
a universe with a tiny cosmological constant and all
the other universes with the large cosmological constants never
formed structure. So there was no one there to
say, hey, we're in a universe with a large
cosmological constant.
So you mentioned Einstein there and of course, if
theorize about the space time continuum and about 1/4
dimension of reality. Does this idea of going above
the three dimensions also connect in any way to
the idea of the multiverse or not?
Well, the idea of dimensions is very interesting. Uh
DIMENSIONS is a little bit of a strange concept
because we know that there are three tangible physical
dimensions. You know, if we, we can, you know,
walk north and south, we can walk east and
west or we can jump up and down. Those
are the three ways we can move. Uh So
those are the physical dimensions. But then at some
point, people started saying, even in the late 19th
century, that time has a quality that resembles a
dimension. Uh BECAUSE uh you can imagine things changing
over time just like they might be different in
different directions in space. And that was idea was
solidified. Uh When Herman Mankowski in 1907 said that
Einstein's special theory of relativity was best developed in
44 dimensions. And finally, after a few years of
saying, oh dimensions, four dimension is kind of an
abstract concept and not really liking it. Einstein adopted
the fourth dimension and used it in his general
theory of relativity. So that's pretty well accepted. But
around the time that Einstein proposed General Relativity, a
phys, a mathematician uh Theodore Kaluza who was in
uh East Prussia and part of then part of
Germany, a German empire um wrote to Einstein and
said, hey, wait a minute, maybe you can add
another force to your theory, electricity and magnetism, which
we call electromagnetism by adding an extra dimension to
your theory and having 1/5 dimension that uh we
don't detect but still comes into the theory. So
that's the Kusa idea of the fifth dimension. And
later someone named Oscar Klein connected with qua quantum
physics. So now we call that Kusa Klein um
higher dimensional theory. And Klein proposed the idea that
the higher dimension was kind of curled up into
a very tight circle, kind of like if you
look at a piece of spaghetti or a piece
of pasta, and you look at not the long
part of it, but we look at the radius
of it. It's very, very tiny. So if you
were observing a piece of spaghetti from a great
distance, it would just look like a one dimensional
object, it would look like a straight line. You
wouldn't be able to tell that it has a
thickness. And similarly in the uh Calusa Klein picture,
um the higher dimension, the fifth dimension is curled
up so tightly into such a tight little circle
that we never really detect it, that's impossible to
detect. Well, um if you look later in the
history of physics, string theory was developed starting in
the 19 eighties as this idea that particles are
not really particles, but they're energetic strands that are
vibrating and their vibrations create the particle categories. But
mathematicians discovered that string theory does not mathematically make
sense. It's mathematically inconsistent unless you put it into
a 10 dimensional theory at least. And so you
need to add not just 1/5 dimension, but you
need to add six more dimensions beyond space and
time. So, uh so you have 10 dimensions. And
um in a related topic called Super Gravity, um
people like Eugene Kremer and Bernard Julia in France
developed the idea of spontaneous compact application. Um And
I think that was developed in the late 19
seventies, this idea that um all the other dimensions
would collapse and you would only see four of
the dimensions, but the other dimensions would just, you
know, become crushed into something that's undetectable. And um
other physicists found that there are many, many, many
different ways that this collapse of the higher dimensions
can occur and many different possible geometries for the
higher dimension. Once it's collapsed, it turns out to
be 10 to the 500 power possibilities for this
kind of collapse into 10 to the 500 power
types of geometries. And you could think of those
geometries kind of like pretzels, not just rings but
or doughnuts, but all these different twisty pretzels, you
know, and imagine 10 with a 500 zeros possibilities.
And each of these can lead to its own
universe model its own physics. And um some physicists
talk about, you know, 10 to the 500 possible
universes out there, each with its own um type
of what we call internal geometry. Um INTERNAL meaning
that you don't really see it as opposed to
external geometry. So that's another yet another idea of
the multiverse is that to try to explain why
we're in one particular type of universe. But there's
all these other possibilities out there, 10 to the
500 other possibilities out there, which is very, very
perplexing. And that's how dimensions comes into the picture
of the multiverse models.
And so these universes with different configurations. WW should
we expect them to also have different laws of
physics?
Yes. So they would have uh not necessarily uh
super different laws like you might like, you might
think if you know naively physics, you say, OK,
force equals mass times acceleration, something you learn in
basic physics. And then, you know, you wouldn't have
like force is mass to the third power at
times acceleration hub, but you might have uh different
constants strength constants for the forces. So we have
all these parameters in physics which tell you how
strong, how strongly particles can interact with each other.
So for example, uh if you have, you know,
two magnets like two refrigerator magnets or bar magnets,
and you hold them 1 m away from each
other, you know how strong the attraction will be.
Well, maybe in another universe, they would have a
much stronger attraction to each other. Maybe in a
third universe, they have a much weaker attraction to
each other. So, in one universe, like, you might
have a refrigerator and you wanna put a magnet
on the refrigerator, you know, with your favorite football
team or something like that, you put it on
the refrigerator and it just never sticks because the
magnets are never strong enough. And then another universe,
you get, um, a magnet for your favorite football
team. You put on a refrigerator and then that
football team does terribly like they keep, you know,
uh losing like, oh, I, I'm gonna support another
football team. You try to take the first magnet
off, but it's impossible because it's stuck on there
forever because the magnetism is so strong. So, you
know, we're lucky, we're in a universe where you
can take refrigerator magnets on and off and they'll
stick as long as you want to. But then
if you wanna take them off, you can take
them off.
But let me just ask you 11 more question
about uh dimension. So, is it possible in any
way to, I mean, to test that out empirically,
to detect them empirically or, or is this something
that we just are able to figure out mathematically
well with these unseen dimensions? Um The whole theory
is designed so that these dimensions would be undetectable.
But then of course, people will say, well, then
how do you prove it? Well, then you try
to look for what's called, what are called low
energy ramifications So string theory operates, it lives on
a very, very high energy scale. So um if
you um if, if you want to see string
theory, you know, don't know, don't really uh have
the possibility of creating uh colliders on earth or
even in the solar system that would be strong
enough to produce those ultra high energies. But then
people say, well, maybe you can see a slight
change in the results due to the higher dimensions.
So there are theories that predict you would see
a slight difference in the outcome of a collision
experiment due to the fact that there are more
dimensions in space. So those are the things people
are trying to test for these subtle differences. And
so far, these haven't been found. Um THAT would
be Nobel Prize winning material. If you could show
that a collision experiment, you get a difference that's
significant enough to show that some of the energy,
for example, escaped into a higher dimension.
And when it comes to the origins of our
own universe and the Big Bang, which is something
you referred to earlier. I mean, what is the
most accepted uh explanation for the origins of our
universe or the way that the Big Bang occurred
or played
out? So, um physicists, most physicists don't talk about
what happens before the Big Bang because um as
people like Stephen Hawking proved in the 19 sixties,
the actual Big Bang event would be a singularity
So nothing would be detective before then. Now that
said there are other theories about cosmic cycles that
there were other cycles of creation. But the standard
Big Bang theory is that it's a singularity that
time began essentially at that point. So we can't
really talk about before the Big Bang. And then
space came into existence during the time of the
Big Bang time came to existence and then the
universe immediately began expanding. But then um at this
point, there was a certain amount of energy in
the universe, a certain amount of energy background. And
one thing um that was found in the early
universe is something with a technical name. It's called
a scalar field. And a scalar field sounds like,
you know, something very mathematical. But in reality, it
just means that you have a map of energy
that's different from point to point. Kind of like
if you were going mountain climbing and you wanted
to find out which were the highest peaks which
were the lowest peaks. And what would be the
best way to climb up a mountain? You might
have a topographical map and that topographical map would
tell you the elevation at every point. So it
might say, OK, this point is 500 m high.
This point is 1000 m high. This point is
more, this point is less and then you can
plan your walk and your hike um up the
mountain based on the topographical map. Well, if you
look at the early universe right after the Big
Bang, you could map out its energy and that
would give you what we call a scalar field.
And if that energy has a certain profile, meaning
it has a certain level, um and that level
persists for a while and slowly changes over time,
then that, that bump in energy um causes expansion
super rapid expansion at that particular point in space.
So if you have a certain energy profile, that's,
that's flat for a certain period of time, meaning
it would be kind of like you have, you
know, uh you climb up a mountain and then
you have this flat plateau where things are pretty
much level that triggers the universe space in the
universe to start expanding really rapidly. It's just a
result of Einstein's general theory of relativity which says
that space expands depending upon what's in it, what
mass is in it, what energy is in it.
So space starts to expand rapidly that stretches out
that part of the universe and that's called inflation
and that happens super rapidly. And suddenly when um
when things uh expand enough, um the universe no
longer um sits in that energy zone that, that
it it it's no longer subject to that scalar
energy field um which, which has evolved slowly over
time. Um And that you no longer have inflationary
period, that enormous amount of energy created by that
super rapid expansion turns into all these particles. So
all the particles that we see today, you know,
light particles called photons, the particles we know as
electrons the quarks. And this whole zoo of particles
is created at the exact moment that inflation stops.
And all this energy turns into matter. Uh FOLLOWING
E equals MC squared energy is matter times the
speed of light squared as Einstein said, so then
that's when the the physical universe with all of
the particles is created. But as Andre Linde said,
um this might happen in other parts of the
early cosmos creating other inflationary events and other universes.
And that's where you get the multiverse picture. Mhm
So I I mean, is that idea that we
sometimes see or read about in popular science publications
uh where I mean, if a uni if a
multiverse is real, it is usually depicted visually as
different uh bubbles or different spheres. And then uh
we read that uh basically what could have happened
is that two of them or perhaps even more
collide with and when they collide they create a
new universe or they provoke what would be a
big bang? And the a new universe uh is
created from that, I mean, does that have uh
any support in actual physics or not?
Well, there are ideas of higher dimensional planes called
membranes or brains for short colliding along a higher
dimension. That's a different idea that was proposed by
Neil Turret Paul Steinhardt and others uh around uh
2000. And uh that's called a cyclic cosmology. And
that's an alternative to inflation and inflation, the bubbles
expand and they could collide. But when they collide,
they don't really create a new universe, they create,
maybe create a little scar. So when two universes
collide, they might create some disruption in matter and
energy and that theoretically could be seen in a
uh kind of rings scar like rings in the
cosmic microwave background. And scientists are trying to look
for these rings that are relics of early collisions
between us and another universe. So that is one
way of trying to uh physically prove the existence
of a multiverse. So um in, in my book,
I talked interviewed Jana P Pols who's uh who's
a researcher at the University of London, who uh
her team is trying to look for uh evidence
of of bubble collisions in the early universe. And
also their latest project is to try to simulate
this computationally and do
black holes connect in any way to the multiverse
or not?
Well, there is a theory um by Lise Mullen,
uh a physicist that um black holes uh they,
they, they are known to be extreme events in
the universe. And um I if you look at
um uh standard general relativity, we say that the
more mass you have concentrated in a point, the
more space time warps. Well, for black holes, you
have an infinite warping. So it creates what can
look like a tear or a hole in the
fabric of space time. And um there are ways
to mathematically connect the black hole with another part
of space and create a kind of a um
you know, what could be a connection with another
part of our universe. And some speculate that it
could create a new universe uh like uh as
Lise Mullen called it a baby universe and that
this baby universe could grow up into a big
universe and then create more black holes. And he
has this idea of survival of the fittest where
the universe that creates the most black holes is
evolutionary fitter than other universes because uh it also
creates um more stars and more planets and more,
more likelihood for life. So that's a really interesting
idea, but that's not really the thrust of uh
most researchers who do, who study the multiverse as
more of an idea of, of one researcher
and does the science and philosophy of counter factuals
uh have anything to do with the idea of
a multiverse.
Well, yes. Uh So in philosophy, we can speculate
upon all the possibilities that are out there. And
uh that was, you know, done all the way
back to people like philosophers like Leibnitz. So Leibnitz
talked about all the possible universes out there that
he, he talked about the divine or God thinking
about all these other possibilities. But of course, God
is uh as, as he would say, perfect in
his wisdom and chose from all these among these
other possibilities, the best possibility for us, the best
of all possible worlds. But he imagined all these
other worlds out there, you know, where earth was
brutally hot and unpleasant and you know, food was
unappetizing and people were, you know, uh you know,
these unthinking beings. But in his wisdom, he said,
OK, we want a world which is pleasant, as
nice climate, as nice oceans. And as people who
are kind of a little bit like, you know,
a little bit like the divine because they can
make choices and so forth. So Leibniz kind of
talked about this idea of the best of all
possible worlds. And the writer, uh Voltaire famously satirized
this idea with his character Candide. Uh So as
this novel Candide, where he had a character named
Pangloss who was a philosopher who would no matter
what happened, there could be an earthquake. Um In
fact, I think he talked about the, the great
earthquake in Lisbon and uh you know, it's horrible
earthquake. And he said, well, you know, it must
be the best possibility because God meant us to
be in the best of all possible worlds. So
even if, even if you know where there's all
this suffering, it still works out for the best.
And uh Voltaire thought that was very amusing that
a philosopher would say anything is, is always the
best outcome. Mhm
So one of the questions that you also explore
in the book is how explaining why the universe
is habitable uh uh as something to do with
the idea of the multiverse. So what's the connection
there or the possible connection?
Well, this was an idea called the Anthropic Principle
developed by Brandon Carter who was someone who was
at Cambridge. He, he was a friend of Stephen
Hawking. And uh you know, Cambridge was this really
hot area for cosmology. It still is. But in
the 19 seventies, uh Cambridge and Princeton were two
of the best places to go in Princeton. You
had uh John Wheeler in Cambridge, you had people
like Hawking and Penrose and Brandon Carter was also
there. And Carter also spent some time at Princeton.
So we got to know John Wheeler and he
found out about Hugh Everett's uh idea of the
many worlds interpretation. So that got Brandon Carter thinking
about the multiverse, although it wasn't called as such.
And he thought, well, there's all these questions, cosmology
about uh parameters like why certain physical parameters should
have certain values. And that's called the fine tuning
problem. Because if the strength of electromagnetism was different,
you wouldn't have uh you know, for example, atoms,
you know, being stable. If you had, for example,
the charge of a proton being slightly different than
a charge of electron, then you know, the atoms
would collapse. So there are all these coincidences in
the universe, things that um if you change slightly,
the universe would not be suitable for life. And
Brendan Carter said, hey, wait a minute, what if
there's all these other units versus out there where
things are different? But the fact that our universe
eventually leads to stable planets, um thriving stars and
um life and, and particularly intelligent life that can
talk about the universe. Uh Maybe that restricts this
range of possibilities down to one universe. And they
call that the anthropic principle for the Latin anthroposophy
and some others said, well, maybe that term is
a little bit misleading because you don't just need
people, you just need stability, stable, stable planets and
life. Um You could have other beings um observe
it. But um but anyway, that's uh one idea
of the multiverse is uh this idea of the
anthropic principle and it explains why um you have
a universe that supports habitable worlds
and does the idea of the multiverse connect in
any way to a potential theory of everything or
a simple unified explanation of the natural forces.
Well, um this is what we call the holy
grail of physics or the ultimate goal of physics
is to create a theory that unites all of
the natural forces into a single simple set of
equations. And uh it's an elusive goal because um
we made great progress in uh the 19 sixties
and 19 seventies with developing the Standard Model and
the standard model includes the electro weak unification, which
very, very nicely unites electromagnetism with the weak force.
The weak force is the force that explains radioactivity.
And of course, electromagnetism explains why charges uh attract
to repel and why magnets attract to repel. All
of those can be explained with a single theory
that is also uh consistent with quantum physics and
it's very, very accurate. So electro weak uh predictions
are as accurate as any experiment that's been ever
been done. So it's extremely successful. Now, we also
have the strong nuclear force which explains why atomic
nuclei are stable. And there's a theory for that
called quantum chromodynamics, which is a very, very successful
theory. Um And um it's not as well tested,
I should say as electro weak, but it also
has very similar properties to electro week and involves
this idea of uh two types of, of entities.
One is the matter particles quarks, electrons and so
forth. And then you have force carrying particles which
are particles that are um conveyed from one particle
ma matter particle to another. So they're exchanged just
like throwing a ball to matter particles, throw in
a sense, a force uh carrier back and forth
and that creates a force. So you have uh
a, a bunch of force carriers, you have photons
which carry electromagnetic force, you have the WW particle
and Z particles which carry the weak force and
you have gluons which carry the strong force. Now,
in principle, we should have gravity should be described
using a force carrying particle which some people have
called graviton. But no one has successfully developed a
quantum theory of gravitation that is uh testable and
describes, you know what we measure in the universe.
There are a lot of ideas out there for
quantum gravitation and then the theory of everything would
describe quantum gravity in a way that's consistent with
all the other forces and unify all those into
a quantum theory of all particles and all forces.
And the leading candidate for that is string theory.
But as I mentioned, uh string theory has all
these possibilities, 10 to the 500 string uh geometries.
And each of those creates its own uh theory
of physics of and leads to a diff different
parameters for the Standard model. So those need to
be significantly narrowed down to create a theory of
everything where the multiverse comes into play is you
can say, OK, there's all these possibilities out there,
there's all these theories out there. But the theory
of everything that happens to correspond to our universe
was narrowed down by the fact that we are
here using the anthropic principle, we can say, well,
there are many, many, many, many different theories of
everything, but there's one that matches a universe that
creates planets that creates stars, creates intelligent life. And
that's our particular theory of everything. And that's you
know why we have these particular parameters, different strengths
of different constants. And that in, in, in theory,
narrows everything down to one universe and explains why
we are living in this one universe and explains,
you know, all the constants for our universe. Well,
we're very, very far from that. That's kind of
an idealization. That's the goal, but no one has
ever come up with a way to narrow everything
down to one possibility. But
what are perhaps the main difficulties with integrating gravity
with quantum physics? What are the bigger obstacles there?
Well, the biggest obstacle is mathematical um so back
in the 19 forties, um physicists such as Richard
Feynman, Julian Schwinger and Si Tiro Tomonaga in Japan
developed what are called uh renormalization methods in quantum
electrodynamics. Now that is a very technical term, but
basically what that means is that you can take
two electrons which are char basic charge particles. And
you say, OK, let's develop a quantum theory of
how these electrons interact with each other. And the
way they interact with each other is by exchanging
a light particle called a photon. And then you
say, OK, you have an electron gives off a
photon, that photon is absorbed by another electron. And
then that electron acquires a certain amount of energy
acquires a certain amount of momentum. And then you
could predict the ways where the electron will end
up. And that's called scattering scattering is when you
have two particles, you predict, you know where they
end up what angles, what's the probability they'll end
up at certain angles. And that's something you can
physically measure the scattering, you physically measure where these
particles end up. You test test it according to
theory. And in the 19 forties, quantum electrodynamics showed
how you can add up all the possible ways
electrons interact and using something called Feynman diagrams, which
is a neat way of adding up all the
possibilities. And then using mathematical methods, get rid of
infinite terms that pop up. So if you do
these calculations with particles, because particles are infinitesimal, they
really elementary particles are not only tiny, but they're
believed in this theory to be, you know, mathematically
have zero size. So if you put that into
the theory, you get infinite terms because one divided
by zero is infinity um or unlimited. So what
during these calculations before a five inch ring or
Toman NAA, they found these infinite terms, but they
were able to use a method called renormalization which
basically matches terms, subtracts them so that you get
rid of all the infinite terms. And that's renormalization.
And when electro the weak theory was developed in
19 sixties and 19 seventies, it was shown that
you could also match up terms, subtract them out
and then get um get uh a a finite
amount. And I use a nice analogy in my
book about um how renormalization works? I imagine a
couple two people and they're living together and one
of them earns money and every week gets a
paycheck and she adds up all the money she
earns o throughout a lifetime. And she imagines that
she, she lives indefinitely. Um It's just a hypothetical.
So would make an infinite amount of money. And
the other person is spending each, each month and
the spending would be infinite. And if you say,
hey, wait a minute, this doesn't add up in
the bookkeeping infinite income, but an infinite amount of
spending, that doesn't make any sense. But if you
say, OK, every month, one person brings in the
paycheck, the other person spends it and that creates
a finite amount each month. So that so therefore
everything matches up in the in the bookkeeping. So
the accounting works out similarly, you can do in
a kind of accounting in particle physics with electromagnetism
and the weak force in which everything gives you
a finite result. Well, it turns out with gravity,
you try to do this and you don't get,
you can't match up the terms you keep getting
infinite answers. And the only way around it as
far as physicists can tell is to say, there's
no such thing as infinite decimal that every particle
must have a finite size. And that leads to
the idea of finite strands which are known as
strings at that vibrate instead of particles. So that
leads to string theory. And string theory is finite
So you don't get infinite number of uh you
know, get infinite terms. But then um you have
all these possibilities for string theory. So you have
to narrow things down. So that's the problem with
string theory of so many options.
So earlier, I've asked you about the Big Bang
and the origins of our universe. But how about
the future of our universe? What are perhaps the
main hypothesis that physicists have proposed for the future
of our universe? And is it that one of
them has more support than the others? I mean,
basically, what do we know at this point about
the possible future of our
universe? Well, until the 19 nineties, um you know,
I should say between the 19, late, late 19
twenties or 19 thirties and 19 nineties, the basic
idea was that the universe had three options. One
of them is that expands and then um eventually
collapses. And then the second possibility is that expands
and the expansion slows down but slows down very
gradually. And the expansion keeps going. And the third
option was kind of in between the two that
the universe al almost collapses, not quite collapses and
keeps slowing down and slowing down, but never quite
collapses. But then in 1998 these two teams of
astronomers discovered using measurements of exploding stars or supernova
that the universe is speeding up in its expansion.
And that's called cosmic acceleration. And that means that
you have 1/4 option, which is that the universe
will keep expanding forever, but not only that, but
will speed up in its expansion. And eventually just
everything will just keep getting more and more dilute
and that Galaxies will get further and further apart.
And then finally, our set of Galaxies will be
a hermit, meaning like a loner in, in the
universe and we won't even see any other Galaxies,
we'll only see our galaxy and maybe a few
others in the vicinity. And uh that is called
the sometimes called a big whimper scenario uh from
the Ts Elliot Poe poem. Um THAT you know
how's the world ends? Not with a bang, but
with a whimper. Um IT'S a line from Matthias
Elliott poem. But um there's an even scarier uh
possibility called The Big Rip. And that is that
um whatever is, is causing acceleration keeps getting stronger
and stronger. And then eventually everything is ripped apart,
including planets are torn apart, stars are torn apart
and even the atoms in people's bodies are torn
apart. So everything is torn to shreds and that
will be the end of the universe. Now, those
are some possibilities in the standard model of, of
cosmology. But then if you believe in cyclic universes,
I believe in, um for example, the idea of
Steinhardt and Turek that the universe is um uh
cyclical because you have uh two membranes also known
as brains colliding with each other periodically and clashing
with each other. Um There would be a periodic
phase in which these two like, it's like hyper
planes or planes in a higher dimension, collide with
each other, wipe everything out and reset the universe.
And that would be um the end of everything,
but that would start a new phase of the
universe. And then finally, there's Roger Penrose idea, a
different kind of cycle where at the end of
the universe, there's emptiness, everything becomes more and more
dilute all the particles uh evaporate. And then eventually
you have sheer emptiness, but that emptiness um has
a kind of identity crisis and it mathematically and
instead of thinking of itself is very large, it
thinks of itself as very small and there's just
mathematical transition and then creates a new phase of
the universe. So you have a new cycle. So
those are some of the ideas about the end
of time and you know, either destruction and recreation
of the universe or just the destruction of the
universe.
And is there or I I mean, what is
the likelihood that whatever kind of scenario will occur
and the universe will still be able to sustain
life and perhaps even worse uh being able to
sustain intelligent life like us?
Well, so, so we, we believe in, in, you
know, the current standard cosmology that the universe is
expanding faster and faster. And that um but also
that something called entropy, which is a measure of
disorderly energy is increasing. And that means that stars
will eventually burn out and the sun will eventually
die if the sun dies. We imagine that maybe
we have spaceships that take us to another star,
but then that star might die. So then we
go to a third star and we keep going
and uh maybe all the stars in our galaxy
die. And maybe we have, you know, uh not
only interstellar travel but intergalactic travel, we try another
galaxy, but eventually all of these Galaxies stars will
either um you know, become uh so cold, they,
they can't support life or turn into black holes
and so forth. So then the question is, can
intelligent life survive? And that was answered um at
one point by Roger Penrose who speculated that maybe
we will develop ways to transform our uh intelligence,
our consciousness into maybe, um you know, artificial intelligence
or robots and that could live in under very,
very cold circumstances. But I'm not sure if that
would be quite as satisfying to say that life
would be in these robots that, you know, exist
in, in, in ultra cold temperatures. It's not the
kind of life that we, that most people would
want to live.
Yeah, for sure. And uh if a multiverse is
real, would it have any bearing on the future
of our own universe?
Uh Well, we, if the multiverse, the cosmological multiverse
is real, um unless uh there's some collision with
another universe that happens to hit our part of
the observable universe, probably it wouldn't affect us very
much. We would just know that there are other
universes out there that might have different fates than
our universe. Uh So, uh might not, might not
affect us very much. Um IN terms of the
quantum multiverse of the many worlds possibility, um It's
possible that we would have other versions of ourselves
that might have slightly different um fates in life.
Um You know, if let's say during a quantum
event uh that somehow affected um the rest of
our lives, it's unlikely that um an obs a
single quantum observation will make a big difference in
our lives. But it's hypothetically possible that by making
a different observation that that could affect our lives
and steer our lives on a different course.
And so, of course, in science fiction, many times,
people use the idea of time traveling and depict
it in different ways in movies, books, et cetera.
But is there, is it theoretically possible according to
physics for time traveling to exist or occur? And
if so, would it connect in any way to
the idea of the multiverse or
not? Well, when we talk about time travel, we
need to distinguish between time travel into the future
and time travel into the past. Well as Einstein
uh showed in his, in his special theory of
relativity, if you take an astronaut launch the astronaut
to space and that astronaut somehow can travel very,
very close to the speed of light. And that
astronaut returns to earth, that astronaut's clock would tick
more slowly than earth clocks. And that astronaut could
theoretically travel into the future of earth. Um So,
for example, uh if that astronaut was traveling 99.99%
the speed of light, they might come back and
see that all of their relatives are either, you
know, 100 years old or, or likely deceased. Um,
YOU know, and uh Earth is, you know, instead
of being the 21st century and the 22nd century,
um because time is relative. So that is a
relatively simple way to time travel. And that create
doesn't create any contradictions because you would just go
into the future, you would arrive in the future
and you would maybe have different customs and, you
know, you would say, where, where are the smartphones
and say, no, we use brain chips now or
we use something else. So you would say, ok,
technology has advanced. So that would be one way
of time travel. But what about traveling to the
past? We imagine going back in time and trying
to prevent the Second World War or something like
that, you know, you know, all these tr tragedies.
Um Well, physics does have the possibility of that
by creating something called a wormhole. Now, a wormhole
traversable wormhole is a little bit like a black
hole only it's stabilized. So instead of having this
um very narrow uh tunnel that possibly connects to
another region of space that would not be uh
you cannot travel into which will be deadly. Um
We imagine being able to stabilize this tunnel and
make it so that you can travel through it
and end up in a different part of space.
Well as uh Kip Thorne and some of his
students showed, uh there's a way that you can
uh manipulate the wormhole so that they can act
as a time machine and you could travel backward
in time. And um and then uh you wouldn't
be able to travel before the creation of the
wormhole, but you could travel back to at least
the time when the wormhole was created. And uh
so if there are wormholes that were created naturally
in space that were useful as time machines, you
could use one of those. And then the question
is, could you affect history? And the way it
connects with the multiverse is in science fiction, particularly,
there's this idea that maybe if you go backward
in time and you try to change history that
maybe you start a new branch of reality. So
for example, let's say you go back in time
to the age of Hitler and you assassinate Hitler
and there's no Hitler, there's no Nazi Germany and
World War Two doesn't happen, but maybe something else
happens, maybe Stalin becomes all powerful and takes over
Europe. And then, um so now we have, instead
of, you know, Nazis trying to take over Europe
that's run by Stalin and the Soviets. OK. So
that's a different branch of reality, maybe that would
represent, you know, a type of multiverse where you
have all these other alternative histories. But that is
very science fiction, a very speculative. It's not something
that physics can prove.
So another thing that perhaps is also speculative you,
you tell me is the simulation hypothesis. So what
is it? And does it also, does it have
any relationship to the multiverse?
Well, um the simulation hypothesis is the idea that
could it be possible that everything we see, everything
we observe is a computer simulation that was designed
by some other intelligent being. And the argument for
that is imagine our civilization, um our own civilization
evolves naturally. And currently we have some forms of
artificial intelligence like we could create, you know, at
this point in time, you can create an essay
that looks like it was written by a human
being. It might have some mistakes, you know, using
chat G BT or some other mechanism. Well, imagine
um that you could uh create a simulated human
being, you know, something that would be indistinguishable by
from a human being. And then you go on
to create a simulated city where you have human
beings interact and it seems like human beings and
then you create a simulated planet and then maybe
a simulated, you know, solar system simulated galaxy. Well,
if intelligence intelligent beings uh last long enough, the
chances according to some thinkers that they could create
a simulation is 100% that eventually they would develop
the technology for this. So then imagine you have
all these uh natural worlds out there that create
simulation. So you would have all these simulated worlds
out there. Eventually, the simulated worlds would greatly outnumber
the natural worlds because you could have one natural
world creating all these simulated worlds. So then you
estimate the chances that we're in a simulated world
or a natural world and that becomes almost 100%
according to these thinkers that were in a simulated
world, not a natural world. So I don't quite
buy that idea personally. Um BECAUSE, you know, there's,
there's all these other arguments about design that were
designed and uh the simplest one that, you know,
people who are religious believe or may some people
religious believe? Well, we were designed by a divine
being. Ok. Well, some people don't believe that some
people do believe that, but it's a simpler belief
to say that there's a divine being out there
than to say, oh, well, there's another, you know,
set of beings that created us well, who created
them, you know, were they as simulation? And it
gets into this whole uh philosophical uh tangled argument
about, you know, why are there real beings? Why
are they simulated beings? And what's the connection?
And if we actually were living in a simulation,
would there be any way at all of verifying
that of empirically? I mean, being sure of that.
Well, I can only turn to science fiction and
say, well, maybe someone would hand us a red
pill and you take it and all of a
sudden you see, you see everything like in the
matrix. Um BECAUSE um you know, if it was,
it was a really smart intelligent being, they would
create a perfect simulation. So um but uh you
could speculate about intelligent being that's very, very, very
smart but makes mistakes and creates a flawed simulation.
So all of a sudden you wake up and
you look up at the sky and instead of
seeing, seeing the moon or whatever, you know, wake
up at night and instead of seeing the moon,
you see something that looks like pixels and you're
like, wait a minute, what are those pixels doing
there? But you know, if, if an intelligent race
was smart enough to develop a simulation, it would,
it would conceivably be a perfect simulation, then you
wouldn't be able to tell the difference. So this
becomes almost like, you know, in a way, I
think it gets a little silly uh a little
comical like, OK, you know, if it's a perfect
simulation, could there be flaws? OK, that's gets a
little bit silly to think about things like that.
So we've been touching on science fiction here and
there during our conversation. But what are probably some
of the most common ways that in popular culture,
people portray the multiverse and as a physicist, I
mean, is it that you just take it lightly?
I mean, it's just fiction, whatever or, uh is
it that some of those ways that the multiverse
is portrayed actually bother you?
Well, I think of it from the point of
view of somebody who's a researcher and they apply
to the government for a grant or they applied
to a corporation for a grant. So let's say
they have this idea for testing, you know, using
observations of the cosmic micro background to test for
other universes and the word multiverse comes up and
they send it to, um, somebody to review their
grants and that person has just seen a marvel
movie they see, just saw Doctor Strange in the
Multiverse of Madness and they come back and say
this is not real science. This is science fiction.
You don't get any money from me or it's
another possibility. You could have someone who says, wow,
I love that movie. I love science fiction. You
know, that's really cool that you can test these
things in real life. You get, you know, here's
$100,000 you know, for your grant, 100,000. So then,
um then you could be lucky. So it's, it's
a little bit of a mixed thing. Some scientists
are like, well, science fiction talks about multiverse ideas,
those are really not real science. So let's not
even talk about a multiverse and others uh appreciate
the popular interest as a way of supporting science.
Like, OK, you've learned, you've seen the Multiverse in
movies, let me show you the real multiverse ideas.
Forget about the movies. Here's the real science of
it. So in the movies, the main attraction is
the idea of, of what if you know, what
if you know Spiderman came from a different background?
What if you know in Star Trek instead of
Spock being logical and emotionless? What if Spock were
evil and very emotional? So we see, you know,
an alternate universe where Spock as a beard and
is sinister and so forth. So these are all
talked about in, um, you know, in science fiction.
And then there's even the simple question, what if
I missed a train instead of making a train?
And that's the movie sliding doors where a woman
just misses a subway train versus just makes a
subway train? And the movie shows what happens to
her life in the, the world where she just
makes the train and now their possibility where she
just misses the train. And in one of them,
she discovers that her boyfriend is having an affair
with another woman and she breaks up with the
boyfriend, she finds another boyfriend who's much nicer and
her life continues and then in the other scenario,
she doesn't discover that her boyfriend is cheating on
her, she continues with the same boyfriend and then
we see what happens at the end and I'm
not gonna give too much away, but the branch
of reality, which looks like a good one might
not be so good after all in the movie.
So, these are intriguing ways to think about the
multiverse in science fiction.
Uh, I mean, it's as if, uh, every time
in movies, every time people think about different possibilities,
they're dealing with counterfactual in their mind. What if
this happened? What if that happened? Reality branched and
then a new universe popped up where the, what
if really happened?
Right. Yes, that's right. So we, we often imagine,
uh, what happened, what would happen if we made
different decisions in our lives? Like what if we
decided to move to a different city? So, um,
you know, what if we decided a different job?
So, so imagine we grew up and as a
teenager, we were in a rock band and, you
know, we played it at our high school and
everybody applauded and then our parents say, wait a
minute, you can't make any money from a rock
rock music. You should go into a serious job
and we become an accountant instead. But then, um,
we imagine what would be a scenario where we
say to our parents. No, no, no. We wanted
to stay in music and then we become The
Beatles or The Rolling Stones or, you know, they're
very successful rock band. We say, ah, it's very
good that we didn't listen to our parents. And
we, we pursued our musical dream because we became
one of the most successful bands of all time.
So we don't know until, unless there were, uh,
you know, the possibility of viewing other universes, other
branches of reality, we wouldn't know if our decisions
were good decisions or bad decisions.
So one last question and then sort of related
to this previous one. Do you see, I, I
mean, how do you look at the popular ideas
that people have about the universe? Do you think
that they attribute specific meanings to the universe to
the multiverse that the it might be meaningful in
some way for people to consider the possibility of
a multiverse existing?
Well, I think it's, it's fun to imagine about
different things. And I like science fiction personally and
I like dreaming about other worlds and thinking about
different scenarios and I think that's, that's perfectly healthy.
Uh The only time I have a bit of
an objection is when people exploit quantum physics or
exploit the idea of a multiverse and try to
convince people that um they can control their own
reality by using quantum physics. So they say they'll
say something like, like all you have to do
is want to be rich and you know, um
you know, buy my book or listen to my
audio. I'll show you how, so it's only $100
for this audio. And you'll learn how that using
quantum physics, you'll uh use your mind and make
the right choice and that will you into a
universe where you're very wealthy using, you know, the
idea of a multiverse. Well, somebody is making money
from a false premise there but it's very easy
to try to exploit physics and to try to
convince people uh that they can use it to
become rich or become, you know, immortal, become, you
know, super healthy and so forth. So I would
steer personally, I would steer away from those ideas
because it's, it's not really a proper use of
a physics to say if you think you're rich,
you're gonna be rich.
It's like that very popular book from a few
years ago. The Secret, right? And other similar ideas
popularized by some self help gurus, right?
Yes. Although there are people who, who find quantum
books in the self help section of a bookstore
and then become seriously interested in real scientific ideas.
Like for example, um uh I, I know a
rock musician who in the 19 nineties looked at
a lot of self help books and that led
him to write songs about quantum physics. So it
can be a good thing. Well,
let's send on that note then and the book
is again the lure of the multiverse extra dimensions,
other worlds and parallel universes. I'm leaving a link
to it in the description of the interview. And
uh Paul just before we go apart from the
book, would you like, would you like to let
people know where they can find you when your
work on the internet?
Well, I'm active on what used to be known
as Twitter, also known as X. I'm also on
uh Blue Sky Mastodon. I have my own uh
blog. Uh Yeah, it's active sometimes I post things
and I post articles. Uh So if you Google
my name, uh some of these things should come
up, you know, social media, there's a Facebook writing
page for me, but I'm not uh involved in
that, but there are a lot of social media
that you can reach out to me and especially
on um X Twitter. I'm, I'm very active on
that under the hand of P Halpern.
Great. So I'm also leaving that in the description
of the interview and thank you so much again
for taking the time to come on the show.
It's been fun to talk with you.
Thank you, Ricardo. Those are wonderful questions and I
really enjoyed the interview.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com. And also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perera Larson Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno, Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew
Whitten Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Condors,
Philip Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
NAI Z Mark Nevs called in Holbrook Field, Governor
Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus and
H Her Me and Lain Jung Y and the
K Hes Mark Smith J Tom Hummel S Friends,
David Sloan Wilson. Ya dear, Ro Ro Die Jan
Punter Romani Charlotte, Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo
Stassi na me, Gary G Alman Sam of Zed
YPJ Barboa, Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas
Fry Franca Beto Lati Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary
FTD and W Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul. Giorgio,
Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Wo
David Williams Di Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey Junior,
Old Ebon, Starry Michael Bailey. Then spur by Robert
Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson,
Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No Week, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson,
Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perras, Kate
Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali
Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough Gregory Hastings David
Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net.
A special thanks to my producers is our web,
Jim Frank Luca Stein, Tom Veg and Bernard N
Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, John Carl, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden.
And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian
Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for all.